I WILL proclaim to the world the deeds of Gilgamesh. This was the man to whom all things were known; this was  the  king  who  knew  the  countries  of  the  world.  He  was  wise,  he  saw  mysteries  and  knew  secret  things,  he brought  us  a  tale  of  the  days  before  the  flood.  He  went  on  a  long  journey,  was  weary,  worn-out  with  labour, returning he rested, he engraved on a stone the whole story.When the gods created Gilgamesh they gave him a perfect body. Shamash the glorious sun endowed him with beauty, Adad the god of the storm endowed him with courage, the great gods made his beauty perfect, surpassing all others, terrifying like a great wild bull. Two thirds they made him god and one third man.In Uruk he built walls, a great rampart, and the temple of blessed Eanna for the god of the firmament Anu,and for  Ishtar  the  goddess  of  love.  Look  at  it  still  today:  the  outer  wall  where  the  cornice  runs,  it  shines  with  the brilliance  of  copper;  and  the  inner  wall,  it  has  no  equal.  Touch  the  threshold,  it  is  ancient.  Approach  Eanna  the dwelling  of  Ishtar,  ourlady  of  love  and  war,  the  like  of  which  no  latter-day  king,  no  man  alive  can  equal. Climb upon the wall of Uruk; walk along it, I say; regard the foundation terrace and examine the. masonry: is it not burnt brick and good? The seven sages laid the foundations. GILGAME SH went abroad in the world, but he met with none who could withstand his arms till be came to Uruk. But the men of Uruk muttered in their houses, ‘Gilgamesh sounds the tocsin for his amusement, his arrogance has no bounds by day or night. No son is left with his father, for Gilgamesh takes them all, even the children; yet the king should be a shepherd to his people. His lust leaves no virgin to her lover, neither the warrior's daughter nor the wife of the noble; yet this is the shepherd of the city, wise, comely, and resolute.'The   gods   heard   their   lament,   the   gods   of heaven cried to the Lord of Uruk, to Anu the god of Uruk: ‘A goddess made him, strong as a savage bull, none can withstand his arms. No son is left with his father,  for  Gilgamesh  takes  them  all;  and  is  this  the king, the shepherd of his people? His lust leaves no virgin to her lover, neither the warrior's daughter nor the  wife  of  the  noble.  When  Anu  had  heard  their lamentation the  gods cried to  Aruru, the  goddess of creation, ‘You made him, O Aruru; now create his equal; let it be as like him as his own reflection, his second self; stormy heart for stormy heart. Let them contend together and leave Uruk in quiet.'So  the  goddess  conceived  an  image  in  hermind,   and   it   was   of   the   stuff   of   Anu   of   the firmament.   She   dipped   her hands   in   water   and pinched off clay, she let it fall in the wilderness, and noble  Enkidu  was  created.  There  was  virtue  in  him of the god of war, of Ninurta himself. His body was rough, he  had  long  hair  like  a  woman's;  it  waved like  the  hair  of  Nisaba,  the  goddess  of  corn.  His body  was  covered  with  matted  hair  like  Samugan's, the  god  of  cattle.  He  was  innocent of mankind;  he knew nothing of the cultivated land. Enkidu  ate  grass  in  the  hills  with  the  gazelle and  lurked  with  wild  beasts  at  the  water-holes;  he had  joy  of  the  water  with  the  herds  of  wild  game. But there was a trapper who met him one day face to face  at  the  drinking-hole,  for  the  wild  game  had entered his territory. On three days he met him face to  face,  and  the  trapper  was  frozen  with  fear.  He went  back  to  his  house  with  the  game  that  he  had caught,  and  he  was  dumb,  benumbed  with  terror. His  face  was  altered  like  that  of  one  who  has  made  a long journey.  With  awe  in  his  heart  hespoke  to  his  father: ‘Father, there is a man, unlike any other, who comes down from the hills. He is the strongest in the world, he is like an immortal from heaven. He ranges over the hills with wild beasts and eats grass; the ranges through your land andcomes down to the wells. I am afraid and dare not go near him. He fills in the pits which I dig and tears up-my traps set for the game; he helps the beasts to escape and now they slip through my fingers.'His father opened his  mouth  and said to the  trapper, ‘My son, in Uruk lives Gilgamesh; no one has ever pre-vailed against  him, he  is strong as a  star  from  heaven. Go  to Uruk,  find Gilgamesh, extol the  strength of this  wild man.  Ask him to give  you a  harlot,  a  wanton  from the  temple  of love;  return  with her, and let her  woman's power overpower this man. When next he comes down to drink at the wells she will be there, stripped naked; and when he sees her beckoning he will embrace her, and then the wild beasts will reject him.'So the trapper set out on his journey to Uruk and addressed himself to Gilgamesh saying, ‘A man unlike any other is roaming  now  in the pastures;  he is as strong as a  star  from  heaven and I am  afraid to approach  him.  He  helps  the  wild game  to escape; he fills in  my  pits and pulls up  my traps.' Gilgamesh said, ‘Trapper, go back, take with you a harlot, a child of pleasure. At the drinking hole she will strip, and when, he sees her beckoning he will embrace her and the game of the wilderness will. surely reject him.'Now the trapper returned, taking the harlot with him. After a three days' journey they came to the drinking hole, and there they sat down; the harlot and the trapper sat . facing one another and waited for the game to come. For the first day and for the second day the two sat waiting, but on the third day the herds came; they came down to drink and Enkidu was with them. The small wild creatures of the plains were glad of the water, and Enkidu with them, who ate grass with the gazelle and was born in the hills; and she saw him, the savage man, come from far-off in the hills. The trapper spoke to her: ‘There he is. Now, woman, make your breasts bare, have no shame, do not delay but welcome his love. Let him see you naked, let him possess your body. When he comes near uncover yourself and lie with him; teach him, the savage man, your woman's art, for when he murmurs love to you the wild’ beasts that shared his life in the hills will reject him.'She was not ashamed to take him, she made herself naked and welcomed his eagerness; as he lay on her murmuring love she taught him the woman's art For six days and seven nights they lay together, for Enkidu had forgotten his home in the hills; but when he was satisfied he went back to the wild beasts. Then, when the gazelle saw him, they boltedaway; when the wild creatures saw him they fled. Enkidu would have followed, but his body was bound a s  though with a cord, his  knees  gave  way  when  he  started  to  run,  his  swiftness  was  gone.  And n o w  the  wild  creatures  had  all  fled  away; Enkidu was grown wea k ,  for wisdom was in him, and the thoughts of a man were in his heart. So he returned and sat down at the woman's feet, and listened intently to what she said. ‘You are wise, Enkidu, and now you have become like a god. Why do you want to run wild with thebeasts in the hills? Come with me. I will take you to strong-walled Uruk, to the blessed temple of Ishtar and of Anu, of love and of heaven there Gilgamesh lives, who is very strong, and like a wild bull he lords it over men.'When  she  had  spoken  Enkidu  was  pleased;  he  longed  for  a  comrade,  for  one  who  would  understand  his  heart. ‘Come, woman, and take me to that holy temple, to the house of Anu and of Ishtar, and to the place where Gilgamesh lords it  over  the  people.  I  will  challenge  him  boldly,  I  will  cry  out  aloud  in  Uruk,  "I am the  strongest  here,  I  have  come  to change the old order, I am he who was born in the hills, I am he who is strongest of all."'She said, ‘Let us go, and let him see your face. I know very well where Gilgamesh is in great Uruk. OEnkidu, there all the people are dressed in their gorgeous robes, every day is holiday, the young men and the girls are wonderful to see. How sweet  they  smell!  All  the  great  ones  are  roused  from  their  beds.  O  Enkidu,  you  who  love  life,  I  will  show  you Gilgamesh, a man of many moods; you shall look at him well in his radiant manhood. His body is perfect in strength and maturity; he never rests by night or day. He is stronger than you, so leave your boasting. Shamash the glorious sun  has  given  favours  to  Gilgamesh,  and  Anu  of  the  heavens,  and  Enlil,  and  Ea  the  wise  has  given  him  deep understanding. f tell you, even before you have left the wilderness, Gilgamesh will know in his dreams that you are coming.'Now Gilgamesh got up to tell his dream to his mother;Ninsun, one of the wise gods. ‘Mother, last night I had a dream.  I  was  full  of  joy,  the  young  heroes  were  round  me  and  I  walked  through  the  night  under  the  stars  of  the firmament, and one, a meteor of the stuff of Anu, fell down from heaven. I tried to lift it but it proved too heavy. All the people of Uruk came round to see it, the common people jostled and the nobles thronged to kiss its feet; and to me its attraction was like the love of woman. They helped me, I braced my forehead and I raised it with thongs and brought it to you, and you yourself pronounced it my brother.'Then Ninsun,  who is  well-beloved and wise, said to Gilgamesh, ‘This star of heaven which descended like a meteor from the sky; which you tried to lift,-but found too heavy, when you tried to move it it would not budge, and so you brought it to my feet; I made it for you, a goad and spur, and you were drawn as though to a woman. This is the strong comrade, the one who brings help to his friend in his need. He is the strongest of wild creatures, the stuff of Anu; born in the grass-lands and the wild hills reared him; when you see him you will be glad; you will love him as a woman and he will never forsake you. This is the meaning of the dream.'Gilgamesh said, ‘Mother, I dreamed a seconddream. In the streets of strong-walled Uruk there lay an axe; the shape of it was strange and the people thronged round. I saw it and was glad. I bent down, deeply drawn towards it; I loved it like a woman and wore it at my side.' Ninsun answered, ‘That axe,  which  you  saw,  which  drew  you  so powerfully like love of a woman, that is the comrade whom I give you, and he will come in his strength like one of the host of heaven. He is the brave companion who rescues his friend in necessity.' Gilgamesh said to his mother, 'A friend,  a  counsellor  has  come  to  me  from  Enlil,  and  now  I  shall  befriend  and  counsel  him.'  So  Gilgamesh  told  his dreams; and the harlot retold them to Enkidu.And now she said to Enkidu, ‘When I look at you you have become like a god. Why do you yearn to run wild again with the beasts in the hills? Get up from the ground, the bed of a shepherd.' He listened to her words with care. It was good advice that she gave. She divided her clothing in two and with the one half she clothed him and with the other herself, and holding his hand she led him like a child to the sheepfolds, into the shepherds' tents. There all the shepherds crowded round to see him, they put down bread in front of him, but Enkidu could only suck the  milk of wild animals. He fumbled and gaped, at a loss what to do or how he should eat the bread and drink the strong wine. Then the woman said, 'Enkidu, eat bread, it is the staff of life; drink the wine, it is the custom of the land.' So he ate till  he  was  full  and  drank  strong  wine,seven  goblets.  He  became  merry,  his  heart  exulted  and  his  face  shone.  He rubbed down the matted hair of his body and anointed himself with oil. Enkidu had become a man; but when he had put on man's clothing he appeared like a bridegroom. He took arms to hunt the lion so that the shepherds could rest at night. He caught wolves and lions and the herdsmen lay down in peace; for Enkidu was their watchman, that strong man who had no rival.He was merry living with the shepherds, till one day lifting his eyes hesaw a man approaching. He said to the harlot, ‘Woman, fetch that man here. Why has he come? I wish to know his name.' She went and called the man saying, ‘Sir, where are you going on this weary journey?' The man answered, saying to Enkidu, ‘Gilgamesh has gone  into  the marriage-house and shut out the people. He does strange things in Uruk, the city of great streets. At the roll of the drum work begins for the men, and work for the women. Gilgamesh the king is about to celebrate marriage with the Queen of Love, and he still demands to be first with the bride, the king to be first and the husband to follow, for that was ordained by the gods from his birth, from the time the umbilical cord was cut. But now the drums roll for the choice of the bride and the citygroans.' At these words Enkidu turned white in the face. ‘I will go to the place where Gilgamesh lords it over the people,  I  will  challenge  him  boldly,  and  I  will  cry  aloud  in  Uruk,  "I  have  come  to  change  the  old  order,  for  I  am  the strongest here."Now Enkidu strode in  front and the  woman  followed behind. He entered Uruk, that  great  market,  and all the  folk thronged round him where he stood in the street in strong-walled Uruk. The people jostled; speaking of him they said, ‘He is the spit of Gilgamesh. ‘He is shorter.’ ‘He is bigger of bone.’ This is the one who was reared on the milk of wild beasts. His is the greatest strength.' The men rejoiced: ‘Now Gilgamesh has met his match. This great-one, this hero whose beauty is like a god, he is a match even for Gilgamesh.’In Uruk the bridal bed was made, fit for the goddess of love. The bride waited for the bridegroom, but in the night Gilgamesh got up and came to the house. Then Enkidu stepped out, he stood in the street and blocked the way. Mighty Gilgamesh came  on  and  Enkidu  met  him  at  the  gate.  He  put  out  his  foot  and  prevented  Gilgamesh  from  entering  the house, so they  grappled,  holding each other  like bulls. They  broke  the doorposts and the  walls  shook, they  snorted like bulls locked together. They shattered the doorposts and the walls shook. Gilgamesh bent his knee with his foot planted on the  ground  and  with  a  turn  Enkidu  was  thrown.  Then  immediately  his fury died.  When  Enkidu  was  thrown  he  said  to Gilgamesh, ‘There is not another like you in the world. Ninsun, who is as strong as a  wild ox in  the byre,  she  was the mother who bore you, and now you are raised above all men, and Enlil has given you the kingship, for your strength sur-passes the strength of men.’ So Enkidu and Gilgamesh embraced and their friendship was sealed.